[Music]
Welcome to Cellular Healing TV episode
94. We have a very special guest joining
Dr. PMPA and I on the call today. We
have Dr. Thomas Safereed. And uh I'd
like to to start off by by just sharing
a little bit about uh Dr. Safe, then I
will introduce him and uh we'll get
started with the interview. But I'm so
excited to have a professor and Dr. Safe
on the call. Um he's an expert and
pioneer in the field of cancer research.
Um he's been he's a professor of biology
at Boston College and one of the leading
academic researchers in promoting how to
treat cancer nutritionally. He's been
teaching neurogenetics and
neurochemistry as it relates to cancer
treatment at Yale University and Boston
College for the past 25 years. He's
written many many peer-reviewed
scientific articles and book chapters
and also published a book called cancer
as a metabolic disease on the origin,
management and prevention of cancer
which we'll be discussing today. Uh the
book provides extensive information
showing that cancer can be best defined
as a mitochondrial metabolic disease
rather than a genetic disease which is
an exciting concept and has implications
for developing new non-toxic cancer
therapies including the ketogenic diet
which we talk about a lot on the show.
Um experts in the cancer research field
have praised this comprehensive study as
one of science's most cutting edge
topics. Um I know your work has really
impacted Dr. PMPA and um and his
approach in supporting his client's
health. So, we're so excited to have you
on the show. So, welcome Dr. Safe Reed.
Oh, thank you very much.
Yeah,
I would love to say this up front.
Here's the book if everyone can see it.
And I tore this book apart uh professor
and loved every page of it. I really
did. And uh you know, some people might
not appreciate the biochemistry, but I
can say that I absolutely loved it. But
uh you know cancer you know is uh you
know a disease today that um I believe
many are taking a wrong approach. And I
want to say this at the top of the show.
We're not claiming to treat cancer.
We're not claiming to treat any disease.
But I believe the research in this book
really shows that where the billions of
dollars are being spent is absolutely
being misdirected. And I believe that
the science shows that if we put these
dollars in a different direction that
you talk about in this book, I believe
we would see the statistics changing.
And doc, I don't know where it was in
your book, but you talked about the
number of cancer cases per year and the
number of deaths per year either not
changing or in fact going up on a yearly
basis, you know, and so, you know, let's
start there because, you know, we're,
you know, you your theory here runs
contrary to what's being done and
cancer. We're not winning the war, we're
losing the war. So, you know, what about
Well, you know, the the death rates um
is about a 30 in the last 25 years,
there's about a 37%
increase in new cases um and a about a 3
and a half to 4% increase in um in
deaths per year. So if if you look at
the the trajectory of the two paths,
you'd say uh uh we're winning the war on
cancer because the number of deaths per
year is not increasing at the same rate
as the number of new cases. However, the
the number of deaths per year uh
continues in its relentless increase
year after year after year. If you have
something that's going to be effective,
you should see a very sharp drop in the
number of debts per year, not a lower
rate of increase, because the lower rate
of increase could be due to a lot of uh
of different kinds of things. But if you
have something that really works, you're
going to see a significant drop in the
number of deaths per year.
Yeah. So you and I would agree then
therefore then with that argument that
the money because billions are being
given to cancer. It must be then that
it's being spent on an approach that
simply is not working. And you and I
agree that those statistics are showing
that. So you know really where the money
is being spent is genomic research,
right? I mean that you know most people
out there I think in the public anyway
would say they're doctors and they've
heard that hey you know you get cancer
it's because you're unlucky right you've
got the gene yet I know and I've read in
other studies and yours look you know
700 gtargeted therapies at least you
know are out there and yet none of them
have been shown to reduce tumors you
know so what's going on with
I I think I think the conception is is
that the cell the it's a disease of of
unbridled cell proliferation and most of
the therapies that are being used to
treat the disease are focusing on the
the uh the proliferation of the cells.
So uh these toxic chemicals uh chemos
various chemos are are designed to block
the cell cycle in various in various
respects damage the DNA so that the
cells can't can't divide radiate irdiate
this this is all based on breaking DNA
trying to stop the the the the
uncontrolled uh growth uh of the cells.
So we we subject ourselves to a whole
range of different toxic uh drugs and
and different kinds of therapies. But
the the genomic approach is um now into
checkpoint inhibitors based on the
mutations that exist in the various
cells. Not not as many people are
getting drugs uh based on the genomic
research um as as are getting the
standards of care which have been in the
field for quite for quite some time. Um
mainly because a lot of those drugs the
new drugs based on check on imun called
so-called imunotherapy
um are extremely costly. Uh but what's
more important they they don't work for
the majority of the people and um
they're very they can have also very
significant side effects and toxic
effects that can be equally as troubling
as the standard toxic drugs that we're
that we're currently using. So we
persist with radiation and chemo um
because the because the checkpoint
inhibitor drugs have not uh led to the
kinds of drop in in in disease that we
would like to see. If those checkpoint
inhibitor drugs for the new fad that is
currently in in place uh which is
imunotherapies and many drug companies
and uh institutions are are actively
investigating or implementing these
kinds of things. Um if these really
worked as well as they should then uh we
should see a precipitous drop in the
number of new of of deaths per year and
we're not seeing that. So we have to
rely on the tried andrue toxic therapies
that have been in existence you know for
the last um 75 or or or 80 years you
know 50 to 75 years. These are very
horrifically toxic kinds of of
therapies. So we're working on areas of
of research or that will reduce some of
the toxicities, you know, things that
are not quite relevant to the nature of
the disease, but trying to take the edge
off the toxicity from some of the drugs
that are that are being currently used.
Now if people realize that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease and
therefore all of the cells are
fermenting to one degree or another,
they have to use those fuels that are
available in sufficient quantities that
allow the cell to grow by using
fermentation, which is a primitive form
of energy metabolism. And it's very
clear to those of us who work in the
field that the two primary fuels that
are driving these cells to grow are
glucose and glutamine. So these are the
fuels that are present in our body in
sufficient quantities logistically to
allow cells to proliferate and have the
the the fuels available that can allow
them to proliferate. So so the the the
simplistic way to manage the disease is
simply restrict the availability of
those fuels that are driving the
fermentation metabolism because you have
to realize that every cell genetically
is a different entity. So no two cells
in the tumor are will have the same
genetic mutations, but all of the cells
in the tumor are fermenting to one
degree or another. Why are we focusing
on the unique aspects of every different
cell in the tumor when we can focus on
the on the malady that's common to every
cell in the tumor? This is the
conundrum. This is the puzzle.
Absolutely. And let let me back up for
our our watchers and listeners because
you know I you threw out some you know
good biochemistry there but I'm going to
back up and make it as simple as
possible and tell me where I go wrong if
I do. Okay. So you know according to the
Warberg theory and this is a doctor that
you know I've read uh his stuff some
years ago uh early 1900s. He said you
know based on his theory he said look
cancer cells have some one thing in
common. something gets damaged in the
mitochondria, right? There's a damage
there. Therefore, that's folks
listening, that's where we produce
cellular energy. Okay? So, we make, if
you remember back into your
biochemistry, I'm stretching some of
you. There's a process called oxidative
phosphorization where we make most of
the ATP and that's the cell energy.
Something gets damaged and now the cell
can't make that same amount of energy.
Am I good so far? Okay. So now in that
process the cell then can turn on a gene
some adaptation occurs and it
upregulates a less effective form of
cell energy production called glycolysis
and that means without oxygen it's a
different less efficient way of making
cell energy the use of glucose for
energy and that's what uh professor was
saying. So therefore it upregulates that
to make up that energy difference. So
now we have these cells that have
adapted to damage probably turning on a
gene. So according to your research, the
gene doesn't come first because that's
what research is saying that we have bad
genes and then that causes a cellular
problem. You're saying no no the damage
happens first. The adaptation then
perhaps can trigger the gene which is
the secondary thing. Correct. And then
we have this adaptation of now the cell
the cancer cells utilizing glucose as an
energy source.
Well um yes there's a confusion that
exists over the term aerobic glycolysis
and aerobic fermentation because um
you're right. I mean all of our cells
use the glycolytic pathway glycolysis
converting glucose to pyuvate.
Under normal aerobic conditions our
bodies are well oxygenated. So our cells
take in glucose. All of our cells. We
break food down. Glucose is a prime food
uh fuel for the brain and many other uh
organ systems take in glucose. The
glucose is metabolized to pyuvate
and then in normal cells the pyuvate
enters into the mitochondrian for full
oxidation with the waste products being
CO2 and water.
And this is the standard respiration in
our in our body. It's called aerobic
glycolysis.
Right? But many people use the same term
aerobic glycolysis to reflect the
abnormal energy metabolism in a tumor.
The tumor cell is using aerobic
fermentation because it produces lactic
acid. The pyuvate rather than going into
the mitochondria which can be defective
in many ways. There's not just one way.
There's many different uh ways in which
tumor cell mitochondria can be abnormal.
the so if pyuvate can't be fully
oxidized, it's rapidly reduced to lactic
acid or lactate which is then dumped
outside of the cell leading to an
extracellular acidification of the micro
environment leading to a wound kind of
uh micro environment leading to the
inflammation and the progression and a
lot of other the other things. Now the
mutations. Okay. So if the respiration
is not effective yet oxygen can still
some oxygen can still get into the cell
the the they form reactive oxygen
species because the respiratory system
of the cell is not completely efficient.
Ross reactive oxygen species are known
to be carcinogenic and mutagenic. So
these reactive species coming out of
defective mitochondria then damage the
nuclear genome and cause mutations as an
EP as a downstream effect of the damage
to the respiration
turned on secondary to the insult. The
damage happens first. The gene gets
turned on secondary to the mitochondri
uh the metabolic shift.
You have to be careful about the gene
that gets turned on because what's
happening is the Ross uh damage the
nuclear DNA. Okay. Now if if the if the
mitochondria don't produce sufficient
energy through respiration the cell uh
naturally detects this and begins to
ferment. Now the genes that control
fermentation are often the ankco genes.
They are transcription factors that
upregulate fermentation when respiration
becomes insufficient. So ankcogene
turnon is a response to the damage to
the respiration. Okay, so the ankco
genes are needed to upregulate the
primitive form of energy metal to a
greater extent because all of our cells
are producing pyuvate through
glycolysis. But if because our energy
through uh respiration is so efficient,
so uh streamlined. Now, if that doesn't
work, in order for the cell to remain
alive and not have a massive energy
failure, the cell has to gradually
increase the capacity to produce ATP
through an alternative system, which is
this primitive form of energy called
fermentation that existed on the planet
before oxygen came into the atmosphere.
Yeah.
So, the cells, this is a relic of the
past. That pathway of glycolysis is one
of the most ancient pathways that we
know of in metabolism. And that pathway
is the first step in normal energy
metabolism but becomes the dominant form
of of energy when the respiration
becomes defective.
So we have something very odd going on.
We have the you know the production of
energy you know via oxidative
phosphorilization and that's that very
efficient aerobic pathway the use of
oxygen and this fermented glycolysis
process going on or this you know
fermented uh you know by utilization of
glucose I'm trying to make it simple for
our people to understand which is less
finished but both of them are going on
at the same time which I think Warberg
refers to as um
respirator atory fermentation, you know,
which is almost contraindic, you know,
contrary in itself where you have these
two things going on at the same time
that typically aren't because these
certain genes get triggered through this
Yeah. Well, I I think I I think the um
the idea of of um of the fermentation
it's um fermentation happens in muscle.
Uh you you get um lactic acid
fermentation when oxygen becomes
insufficient to to generate the energy.
So the muscles begin to ferment, they
produce lactic acid.
Sure.
If we go into a room with very low
oxygen levels, we get lactic acid
increase in our body because our cells
begin to transition uh to naturally uh
the the the primitive pathway. So we end
up with a lactic acidosis as the result
of going into hypoxic environments.
During epilepsic seizures, the bra the
the body will stop breathing. You get a
tremendous increase in lactic acid uh as
the result of this. This is fermentation
is the production of lactic acid. So
pyuvate has the has the as at the fork
of this uh under aerobic conditions
pyuvate is normally fully oxidized in
the in the mitochondria but under under
hypoxic conditions pyuvate that is
generate generates lactic acid very
highly. The strange thing about the
tumor cell is that it continues to
produce lactic acid even when oxygen
levels are sufficient for respiration.
So people, so that's happening because
the mitochondria are deficient. So that
so those cells behave as if as if
they're in a hypoxic environment despite
the fact that they look like they have
respiration, but they don't.
So Warberg's theory years ago and and
yours today is, okay, great. So we have
this cell that you know h has adapted to
this damage and now functioning with
this you know very uncommon uh odd
energy pathway combination here. Okay,
so we know that cancer cells this is
common in all cancer cells unlike the
gene theory that's trying to find
specific genes common to each cancer
which they have not been successful but
yet we know that this is common to the
majority of tumor formation cancer cell
formation. So your theory then is if we
can stop this fuel the the glucose and
we we'll we'll get to the uh the amino
acid the use of amino acid to in uh this
process of energy as well but let's
focus on the glucose for now. If we can
get the cell to not use glucose then we
can either kill these cells through
apoptosis where the cell kills itself
and fix and even diminish tumors.
Well, you you you know this has been
tried many times and it's been
unsuccessful
um throughout a number of different uh
drugs that have used to stop glycolysis.
The problem of course is when you do
that you stop that glycolytic pathway in
every cell of the body. So this now
becomes a real problem because every
normal cell is using the same pathway.
It's just that the tumor cell happens to
be using it to a much greater extent
than the normal cells. So by using a
indiscriminate inhibitor of glycolysis,
yes, you will kill some of the tumor
cells um but you'll also damage uh uh
the the functionality of the normal
cells. So this is why when we do
therapeutic fasting or ketogenic diets,
you lower the glucose in the body for
the tumor and you transition all of the
cells of the body over to ketones, which
we evolved to use uh when we didn't have
access to food. So the tumor cells
because they have defective respiration
in mitochondria cannot use the ketone
bodies. Right? So this is a elegant
non-toxic way to metabolically
marginalize the tumor cells while
enhancing the health and vitality of the
normal cells. So it's not just targeting
the glucose availability to the tumor
cell. You have to alter offer the rest
of the cells in the body an alternative
metabolizable fuel to the glucose that
you're taking away from them.
Right? The issue of course that the
tumor cells because they have defective
respiration in mitochondria in a number
of different ways are less able to use
the alternative fuel than the normal
cells. So they become uh marginalized.
They they become more vulnerable to die
as the result of these energetic
transitions. It's a very simple and
non-toxic way. Now it doesn't people say
will it cure cancer? You know we don't
we never use the term cure. We term can
it be used to manage cancer? Yes, it can
be used to manage cancer. Slow the
degree of growth down. Then offering the
opportunity to mix and match a number of
diets and drugs in a non-toxic series of
approaches to finish off the surviving
tumor cells. Now, many of the surviving
tumor cells, whatever they happen to be,
will likely have some characteristic in
common if they can still survive the
metabolic transitions. These cells now
become potentially targets for
imunotherapies and these other kinds of
therapies because now you're dealing
with a population of cells that have
something all in common. So rather than
at the beginning when they're all
genetically different from each other,
the survivors from metabolic therapies
could be very vulnerable to the kinds of
approaches that the industry is now
using to target the the tumor at the
very beginning of its of its existence.
So, we're doing a lot of the things the
right, we're just doing them in the
wrong way.
Right.
I remember listening to something or
perhaps I read it about you said if you
take the nucleus of a cancer cell and
put it into the cytoplasm of normal
metabolism uh cell, right? Says what
happens all of the phenotypes, all of
the genetic problems go away, you know,
proving that, you know, look, this isn't
a genetic issue. This is a cell
metabolism issue you know and if we can
change the cell metabolism then we can
surely change
you know in the body.
Well those experiments were done uh
primarily to test the hypothesis as to
whether cancer uh was a nuclear genetic
disease or a mitochondrial metabolic
disease. This is a very this is very
important because as long as the cancer
industry and the academic cancer
industry considers that cancer is a
nuclear genetic disease, we will not
shift the paradigm and and approach the
disease in an alltogether different way.
So those experiments were designed and
done by a variety of of of exceptionally
talented developmental biologists over
many many years. What I did simply was
to bundle those experiments into one
group and present them for the first
time as a bundled group. And when you
look at all these diff disperate uh
experiments done by a number of
different people using a number of
different types of tumors in different
systems, the conclusion was was very
much the same. The nucleus of the tumor
cell is not capable of driving the
disease. Period. It's the mitochondria
that are driving the disease. So once
this becomes more widely recognized, it
becomes very difficult to support the
idea that cancer is a genetic disease,
therefore warranting the billions of
dollars we're spending on on on
approaches that are based on that
theory. So, so once the theory is
undermined, shown by hard scientific
fact that it cannot be the true uh
explanation for the disease, only then
will the field begin to recognize that
we should look in a different direction.
As long as people are considering that
we're still going to persist with the
situation that we have today. And that
was my argument at the top of the show.
We're spending billions in the wrong
direction. You know, if we get people to
understand that's not a genetic
disorder, that's secondary. you know,
then we can actually make make some
headway. You know, I believe, you know,
just in in my work that this
mitochondrial damage, this mitochondrial
issue is leading to not just cancer, but
a multitude of other things that we're
seeing from chronic fatigue to
fibromyalgia,
many unexplainable uh illnesses, you
know, even hormone conditions such as
diabetes and thyroid. I believe it's
there, you know. I mean, I I have
something, doc, that I I call my five Rs
of cellular healing. And R number three
is restoring cellular normal cellular
energy. Um, and and it's it's it's
vital. Absolutely vital. So, you know,
in this look, I mean, you mentioned to
go backwards here a second. You you
know, you mentioned something that's
near and dear to my heart, utilizing a
state of restriction, if you will, via
either fasting and ketosis in using them
together. And now Meredith, you and I,
how many shows have we done on the
benefits of, you know, fasting and even
we even move people in and out of these
states, which I call diet variation.
But, you know, let's, you know, let's
talk about that because, you know, that
is a solution to not just, you know,
we're we're discussing cancer here, but
we're talking about people who benefit
with multiple conditions from putting
them in these restricted states of
ketosis where, by the way, folks
listening for the first time, I have
many articles and past shows on ketosis.
That just means that your cells can use
sugar or fat for energy. We're forcing
the cell to use fat and make ketones.
And he brought that up that these
ketones we use even in healthy people to
make healthier because they turn off bad
genes, you know, they amazing things
happen when ketones are produced
obviously and cancer cells can't use
them and and that was doc's point here.
But we know so we utilize the state of
making the cell make these ketones to
actually make people healthier. you're
saying, hey, this can also, you know,
cause these cancer cells to become
weaker and now our immune system
actually has a chance uh to get rid of
them. So, talk a little bit about
restriction because one thing that we
found with ketosis, doc, is some people
don't lose weight in ketosis. Some
people even have trouble getting into
ketosis and typically these are the
people who need it the most. But you say
ketosis without some form of restriction
in your studies doesn't work. Explain
that. Well, um, it's called, yeah, keto
keto adaptation. My colleague Dominic
the Austin Agugustino from University of
South Florida.
By the way, we're interviewing him in a
in some coming up show.
Right. Right. He he's big into keto
adaptation, which is a a form of
therapeutic ketosis as opposed to
ketoacidosis, which is a pathological
state that is experienced by some type 2
diabetics.
Um, the the when one stops eating, blood
sugar goes down. uh eventually glycogen
reserves in the liver and muscles are
used up and then the body has to turn to
fat. Uh the fat is mobilized out of fat
stores and the liver is the organ that
primarily makes ketones from fat. So the
fat is then metabolized in the liver.
The liver makes water soluble byproducts
these little energy ketone bodies uh
which then can be used by the brain and
other organs the heart and other organs
to become um energy efficient. They they
contribute to mitochondrial biogenesis.
Uh they make it's like it's like a
so they help you make more mitochondria.
Yeah. They can help you make more
mitochondria and healthier mitochondria.
Mitochondria that have very few react
producing very few reactive oxygen
species or wasteful energy.
Right.
So if you want to consider like reactive
oxygen species as kind of a spark uh uh
that can be damaging like a a wire that
has poor insulation. it starts to spark.
It damages area that that goes down
substantially when you're burning
ketones. There's the the the energy is
primarily it's used primarily for uh for
the energy resources within the cell
without making any wasteful harmful
products.
I always say it's like n burning natural
gas when you
wood in the fireplace,
right? you're not produ you produce very
little uh uh um uh products that would
be considered wasteful or or potentially
harmful to to the body
which by the way downregulates cellular
inflammation just by burning leaner
fuel. So yeah
right and we and we showed that we
showed clearly that calorie restriction
downregulates the inflammatory cyto
cascades contributing to tumor cell
inflammation and a variety of other
things. So the tumor cells can't use the
ketones but the normal cells can. the
normal cells get very healthy under
these keto adapted states. But you raise
a very important question that has been
uh perplexing uh the field for a long
period of time. And how do people know
uh if they do fasting, they do ketogenic
diets or they do this or they do that?
How do they know whether or not they're
really in the zone of keto adaptation?
Right? Right. So, we published a paper
earlier this year uh on the glucose
ketone index calculator that was
designed primarily for cancer patients
but could be used for any any person who
would like to know whether or not
they're in a therapeutically ketoic
state. And uh
we use it we use it for all of our
patient all of our clients.
So, you have a little a meter that can
measure both blood glucose and blood
ketones. That's the key. Mhm.
Yeah. You have to measure both of them.
Yes.
And uh you get the ratio in millolar for
glucose to ketone and you get a number
which is a singular number which is the
index. It's a and that one number if you
can get numbers close to 1.0 or below
and you're using ketones uh maximally
efficiently and uh some people like
healthy people who don't have cancer are
able to get into these metabolic zones
much easier than cancer patients are.
And the the one of the things we're
realizing with respect to cancer is that
uh cancer produces a lot of anxiety
among among the sufferers. Um anxiety
can lead to elevated blood sugar level
because the patient understands that
they may have a life-threatening disease
and this brings a lot of stress and
anxiety. And we find that those cancer
patients that are able to handle stress
can get into these therapeutic zones
easier than the cancer patients who
can't handle the the stress. So it's a
global physiological treatment of the
body to allow the cancer patient to get
into these very healthy states. And they
can get in, but it's more difficult for
the cancer patient than it is for the
healthy patient.
Absolutely. And by the way, it's more
difficult for my very unhealthy patients
than it is for somebody healthy to get
into this target zone. And you know, the
ratio that you talked about is glucose
divided by ketones. And we use a
precision extra meter. But simply put,
you have a target zone of glucose
between 55 and 65. And ketones between
three and seven. That's going to put you
in that one range somewhere.
Below it'll put you below.
Below. Yeah. So, and that's where I, you
know, I like to get, you know, people in
that that range as well because magic
happens there, right? You have audio
fagi going on aolytic where the body's
eating stuff, right? And, you know,
you're producing enough ketones to, you
know, really make more healthy
mitochondria, turn off the bad jeans.
So, all that happens in that zone.
Yeah. Well, the issue is you can hit
those zones by just water only fasting
for, you know, four to seven days.
That's that's very hard to do for a lot
of people. So water only therapeutic
fasting is, believe me, it's it's not
easy. You've tried it, you know, I've
tried it. It's not it's not easy,
you know, for a lot of people who keto
adapt. I mean, it's but ketogenic diets
restricted allow the blood sugar to go
down and the ketones to go higher than
you would get if you did pure
therapeutic fasting. However,
however, many people think that if I eat
all this fat, this now becomes an Atkins
diet. And uh Atkins diet is very
different than a ketogenic diet. Atkins
diet has no restriction on proteins and
fat. And also the types of fat are very
different. Right.
So if you eat a lot of protein that's
going to be converted to glucose. It's
going to be harder to get into the
metabolic zone on a natural diet than it
will on a ketogenic diet.
Absolutely.
So all of these things have to be
understood by people who want to engage
in these kinds of of activities.
So for cancer management, a ketogenic
diet is part of what we call metabolic
therapy. Th this is an alternative to
chemotherapy and radiation therapy, but
we think that the outcomes can be the
same. In other words, we can we think we
can get every bit as good of effective
therapy without the toxicity. This is
the key thing. We're trying to manage
cancer without toxicity. And people have
this mindset that you can't do this
unless the patient is subjected to these
horrifically toxic approaches. We are
under the impression that if you
understand the metabolism of the body
and you're able to tweak this the the
pathways in different directions, we can
achieve management of these very
difficult diseases without using toxic
drugs or drugs that can be used in such
low quantities that they're no longer
toxic but now very therapeutically
effective. So all of this all of this
becomes a a reality uh once once people
realize that uh cancer is not a genetic
disease. Okay. For cancer but you raise
another very important point. Many other
diseases that predispose people to
cancer are also metabolic problems.
Absolutely.
Diabetes for example.
Put you at risk for cancer because you
have disregulated blood glucose control.
So if you can manage type 2 diabetes,
you can effectively reduce the risk
significantly for a number of different
cancers. Type 2 diabetes leads to
systemic inflammation because of
elevated blood glucose. So ketogenic
diets are effective in lowering all this
putting reducing the body and as a
matter of fact ketogenic diets can cure
type uh tube diabetes in many patients.
So in that respect you can you can do
this. So the food industry is now
becoming very interested in these kinds
of approaches because there's space
there's a void here. So we have the
pharmaceutical companies on the one hand
that are pushing these various different
kinds of expensive drugs to manage these
diseases when we have this void in the
middle and the some of the food
companies are now moving into this void
realizing that they can produce foods
that could potentially put people in
keto adaptation ketoic states that would
reduce their risk for type two diabetes
and cancer. So I I see a shift, a major
shift coming in how we deal with a lot
of these diseases. It's not necessary to
use expensive drugs that are could be
potentially toxic to manage things that
we know that we can do by knowing how to
manage the metabolic systems of the of
the body and the cells. Listen, we we
all the crazy things that we see with
unexplainable illnesses, none of them
would get well if we didn't utilize
these diet variations, shifting people
in and out of ketosis, these utilizing
fasts of some sort, you know, and doc, a
lot of times just with beeftock alone,
we can target hit certain people in
these target ranges. But I want to go
back to this point, okay? Because you
know the word restriction, we're talking
about um some type of restriction in
food, whether it's via a fast that we do
for a period of time, whether it's 4
days to a week um or something that I
do, I combine ketosis with daily
intermittent fasting where, you know, we
fast even for 18 to 24 hours before
eating the next meal and doing the doing
it daily. But look, I remember reading
in in your work and others and and even
in my own experience, some people go
into ketosis and they're just simply
consuming even if it's not a lot of
protein, a lot of fat, a lot of food,
they're still consuming a lot of food.
And if they don't fall into that target
range, we don't see the results. We
don't even see weight loss in these. And
some of them even struggle to even get
into ketosis because they're simply
still consuming a lot. So we utilize
restriction either fasting with ketosis
or daily intermittent fasting where at
the end of the day they simply take in
less calories you know but talk a little
bit about that because you found that
mice and people didn't lose weight
unless there was some form of
restriction. Yeah. Well, that's a very
important point because in and then uh
because you know a lot of people use the
uh ketone sticks, the urine sticks,
right,
to measure ketosis and that's inaccurate
because if you do take a lot if you do
take a lot of fat in your body, yes, you
will be producing more ketones and
you'll see it on the urine stick.
However, the blood will not have the
elevated levels because the body you're
peeing out the ketones as fast as you're
making them,
right?
Restriction allows the ketones to
replace the lost glucose. So the ketones
then if you restrict a little bit then
you're getting the full benefit of the
ketones. The body will retain them and
use them for energy metabolism. So so
you're absolutely right and we showed uh
and others have shown if if we allow the
animals uh to eat all the fat they want
in other words an unrestricted ketogenic
diet this can lead to insulin incess
insensitivity and dysipidemia
which is very pathological. This is not
healthy. Right?
So people say people say, "Oh, I'm going
to go on a ketogenic diet, eat all the
fat I want." Well, you could put
yourself to harm doing that because your
blood sugar doesn't go down. Your
insulin goes up and the next thing you
know, you have very high triglycerides,
very high. So, you have to the um
ketogenic diet is a medical therapy. It
must be administered usually under the
supervision of a trained person and uh
and or people who do this have to be
aware of of all of the potential risks
using this. It's a medical therapy like
any medical therapy.
No doubt.
Yeah. It's like a drug. I mean drugs can
be good in one concentration and toxic
in another concentration.
So, so the metabolic therapy using
ketogenic diets is a powerful tool to
enhance physiological health. But it can
also be very hazardous if it's not done
right. So I I mean you can't
overemphasize this point.
So some people that we you know say I'm
not getting into ketosis. I have them
looking at their glucose and invariably
their glucose is still too high. So that
means they have to be restricted more.
Yes. You know, somehow someway, you
know, or their carbohydrate intake's too
much.
And and you have to also be careful of
some people who have these rare
inherited diseases like um you know
carnitine deficiencies and certain uh
inborn errors of metabolism that where
they can't make fat and they can't make
ketones or they can't use the fat this
and that. So there's a variety of things
that a rare person can come out and say,
"Oh my god, I and this person could
potentially be harmed by these by this."
That's why measuring measuring glucose
and ketones is important. So just to
review, someone could be taking in too
much protein atkins type of diet.
Someone could be just taking in too much
uh caloric intake totally you know via
fat even. uh in someone uh also could
just you know simply be having too many
carbohydrates still you know genetically
some people have to reduce carbohydrates
more than others that could be stopping
you from getting into ketosis that could
also be stopping you from hitting this
target range that we're talking about
and even stop you from losing weight
some people go I'm in ketosis but I'm
not losing weight well you could have
you know you could still be consuming
not restricting enough one way I make
sure that people you know I'm not a
believer in just pushing food away in
saying I'm not I'm not going to eat
anymore. I'm a believer in restricting
because you are less hungry, right?
You're just simply not hungry, so you
don't eat. Daily intermittent fasting
people where we skip breakfast is a in
ketosis is a way to get them to restrict
and eventually they're like, "Yeah, I'm
not even hungry anymore." But sometimes
it takes a little while to get there
until their ketones rise up. Of course.
No, it it it does. You're absolutely
right. It's also the kinds of fats
they're different. And Atkins diet fats
were just, you know, taking as much fat,
right?
Ketogenic diets are heavier into the
mediumchain triglyceride oils like
coconut oils and avocados and things
like this. So, uh, you don't want to use
too many longchain fatty acids. I mean,
some of this is good. A little bit of
fish oil is fine. Uh, this kind of
polyunsaturated fatty acids, but but the
bulk of the ketogenic diet is shorter
chain saturated fatty acids.
So, and this this plays a very important
role in how high you can get your
ketones as well. So, you know, and
there's certain foods that that are are
more uh uh uh prone to producing a a
better state of ketosis than other
foods. So, people and it could differ
from one person to the next. So,
everybody is their own experimental
system.
I find that to be true. Yeah. Yeah. You
know, I mean, you you you brought up uh
you know, an interesting um point, you
know, with uh the fats that people were
eating. You know, I find that today
people are taking in too much fish oil,
too much rancid fish oil. But even when
it's not rancid because it's a very
fragile oil, uh they're just simply a
lot of healthy people are taking in too
much ending often omega-3 dominance. I
remember years ago showing that omega-3
uh when taken too much can displace
cardipen actually out of the
mitochondrial membrane and it creates a
metabolic uh actually problem. So I I
think that you know everybody you know
right now overloading on fish oil can
actually be a dangerous thing. I
obviously are in agreement with that.
So yeah I mean this is great. Well
Meredith um I don't know if we got any
other uh you know questions. I know some
of our doctors had questions. I I think
we answered most of those Meredith but I
you always have some great questions. So
let me fire at you.
Yeah. Well thank you. This is just such
empowering information too. I think for
anyone watching who has been touched by
cancer, which we all have, or have been
diagnosed with cancer, that this gives
you the power back. Um, not just relying
on, you know, a lot of the conventional
treatments, but taking taking charge and
and um experimenting with the ke
ketogenic diet and these other non-toxic
nutritional therapies. Um, I'm wondering
what what uh Dr. Safe do you think of um
the use of exogenous ketones?
Yeah. Well, I think that's um uh that's
important. the body the the body makes
DBA beta hydroxybutyrate
um because there's there's different
forms of uh there's a DNA L form and um
um uh the L form is metabolized as if it
were a fatty acid whereas the D form is
goes through the full ketoic
mechanism within the liver. So um
however you know my colleague Domino
gets some pretty good results with
exogenous ketones. I think um uh we need
to we need to recognize that uh we
haven't fully uh explored uh all of the
this is a an avenue of great uh interest
and and future research. Um is it
possible that we can even further
exploit keto adaptation using exogenous
ketones? Uh right now it's not they're
not easy to make. The natural ones are
not easy to make. Dr. Richard Vech at
the NIH Yeah.
has been working on this on this area
for many many years. um he is probably
one of the world's authorities on uh the
knowledge of of making uh natural kinds
of ketones and how they influence the
mitochondrial function enhancing the the
redux potential of the mitochondria and
the co-enzyme Q couple. So he is he's
the ultimate knowledge base uh for
really understanding this. But I think
the world of exogenous ketones is an
emerging field that's going to receive
tremendous attention from uh the food
industry and the academic community uh
as we move forward in understanding how
we can manage cancer using metab
metabolic approaches. You know I have to
ask this question. I'm going to ask uh
you know Dominic as well. You know, if
we know ketones is a byproduct of
breaking fat down, fat metabolism,
right? So, by taking exogenous ketones,
by taking ketones, are we going to slow
down the fat metabolism somehow or are
we not going to get the benefits of
actually getting our body to burn fat to
actually make ketones?
Yeah, I I don't know. I think that's a
good question. Um, we need to do a lot
more basic research on that fact. Uh,
these are things that we will need to
vet in the future.
Yeah. So I can't really say because I
most of the stuff that we work with has
been with naturally produced ketones uh
through ketogenic diets or therapeutic
fasting where the body is making the
ketones naturally internally. You know
can we how can we supplement this? Is it
possible to supplement this? Will we get
the same level of therapeutic benefit
without any toxic issues? This all has
to be uh uh explained. But I I do want
to mention one point more about, you
know, how how we can better implement
these kinds of uh approaches. And I
think it has to do uh it can have a lot
to do with how we pay or how we um uh uh
finance uh this the these kinds of
things. And um one thing I I I'm I'm put
in a recent paper is the issue of of
global budgeting. There are certain
hospitals in the country that receive a
certain amount of money to handle the
various health issues that they have in
their population. Now, if they can use
therapies that keep people healthy and
out of the hospital and and manage
disease as outpatient, then the the the
the finances can be better distributed
within the hospital. This is in a
opposite view to fee for service. Okay,
feif for service is where each each
possible each each aspect of the of the
treatment is paid for as a fee for
service. So if global budgeting becomes
a way to reduce the incidence of cancer,
therefore the the hospital staff and
physicians could better uh justify why
they're more interested in in keeping
people healthy using these kinds of key.
Then it becomes financially feasible to
do something like this
as opposed to fee for service which is
going to be you're not the hospitals
need to balance their budgets.
You it's very hard to balance a budget
on a therapy that doesn't generate
revenue.
Metabolic therapy does not generate the
revenue as toxic drugs and these other
things do. The pharmaceutical companies
and the hospitals make a lot of money on
these kinds. Radiation therapy generates
tremendous revenue. These cancer drugs
generate tremendous revenue. you come in
with an alternative therapy that
contributes to the health and
well-being. Where is the revenue
generation going to come from? If you're
going to transition away, it has to come
from a different form of payment.
Global budgeting becomes a potential way
to achieve both goals, the health of the
patient and the and the and the health
of the hospital. I
I tell you what, without that right
there, we're dead in the water because
you're right, unlet comes down to
finances. you know, if we're going to
change this paradigm, you know, that
absolutely has to be, you know, at the
forefront. Otherwise, you're never ever
going to change, you know, what people
are doing it. Understanding that's
great, though. I love that that
approach. You know how about you know we
have you know we talk about fasting we
talk about ketosis and I believe the
magic happens with that combination of
utilizing fasting whether it's daily
whether it's what I call block fasting 4
days 10 days whatever it is right of
restriction water you know beeftock
whatever gets you into that target
glucose and ketone range magic happens
there what about doing shorter because
we get we see a major benefits when we
do shorter 4-day fasts multiple every
other month things like that you think
there's hope in Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely. I mean, these you you know,
some people who may not be able to do a
7-day fast, which is like the majority
of people,
could certainly benefit from a three to
a 4-day fast done, you know, a few times
a year.
Yeah.
I mean, the benefits to your body are
enormous just from these shorter periods
of ination, which is the sessation of of
eating and just drinking uh water. Um,
you know, this is or or green tea. You
know, you can have um you can have these
kinds of things. Also, a lot of people
should feel that if you're going to do a
ketogenic diet, say for a couple of
three weeks or a month or whatever, um,
you know, we're we're we're learning
from a lot of the cancer patients and
people who are doing this about the
kinds of foods and or drink that you can
take uh without spiking glucose or
altering the ketone the glucose ketone
index. And we found that um dark some
dark red wine uh can be taken. people
who have done three-day fasts.
Yeah.
A cup of a cup of wine, you can look at
your G GK index and not see it spike.
But if you take white wine or beer or
something spikes, so everybody can then
uh develop diets and therapies that can
meet at least keep them as part of the
society that we're in. So you don't have
to feel so alone uh when you go and
embark on these kinds of of things.
This is a new area. This is a new area
of of health that needs
and you know I I find exactly and that's
why we measure the glucose and the
ketones to see where people are because
it's a little different for everybody.
You know some people can have their
morning coffee with fat and not go out
of that target glucose range you know
and still be in that fasting mode. Some
people the beeftock fasting keeps them
in the the range. other people with
other so yeah I mean it is varied but
you that's why you have to measure you
know that glucose and the ketones to see
if you're in that target range and uh
you know like I said there's three
factors there too much protein too many
carbs perhaps or simply not enough
restriction you know you're taking in
too much food so yeah but I mean the
fasting is is a remarkable thing and you
know years ago um I was inspired by
Warberg's work and you know my my wife
was uh diagnosed with some cervical
precancer and cancer and uh we put her
on a a fast. It was she says 12 days or
something, you know, whatever it was. I
thought it was 13, but um water fasted,
you know, for 12 days. And uh you know,
she went back some months later and
there there was no more, you know,
cancer and you know, to their surprise
that they said that that would basically
never happen. But that started me years
ago into fasting and you know just
looking at that the benefits of it and
we've been utilizing it ever since. But
you know I I I talk about diet variation
because you you uh you know I I learned
this by accident by people that were
having trouble getting into ketosis and
having some difficulty. After three or
four months I would move them back into
what I call my cellular healing diet.
It's still a low carb diet but it's not
ketosis right something would happen.
they would all of a sudden lose some
weight when they shifted back into that
diet. Then I would say, "Okay, let's
keep them there for three months." I
would move them back into ketosis and I
would see this remarkable thing happened
where that this time it was easier to
get in. But, you know, shifting people
in and out of these restricted phases,
ketosis, diet version, do you see
there's a benefit somehow to that
adaptation?
Yes. Oh, yes. Absolutely. And this is
what we think to manage cancer because
um we think the shifting back and forth
from these different diets is going to
be exactly what you need to eliminate
the tumor cells. You you have to realize
that the tumor cells have a lot of uh
mutations. We nobody denies they they're
loaded with mutations for the reasons as
secondary consequences of respiration
the defect to respiration. But but the
issue is those cells have all these
kinds of mutations that make them less
adaptable to the shifts in these dietary
therapies. So the normal cells of our
body evolved over millions of years to
make these adaptations under these
dramatic shifts that you just mentioned.
But if you have a cell that has all
kinds of broken chromosomes and
deletions and duplications, those cells
cannot make those kinds of shift. They
end up getting getting eliminated,
right?
They they are eventually
gone because they can't make those
shifts. So we can then exploit the
genetic defects in the tumor cells by
make forcing the body to make these
dramatic shifts in one direction or the
other.
This is part of this is part of the
metabolic therapy what you just
mentioned is the strategy that we think
can work.
Absolutely. you know, and and I learned
it by accident. You know, just this
metabolic stress is caused by these
dietary shifts, you know, and you look
at the Hanzu people who live
disease-free and, you know, these
cultures that are really, you know,
successful in their health and live very
long but live long healthy, you know,
they're forced into diet shifts, which
today with refrigeration and, you know,
being able to eat whatever we want any
time, we're not. But it is times, you
know, the Hanzu people, they thought
they were vegetarians because the
British would go there in the summer and
they were eating mostly vegetables and
fruits and things, very light foods. In
the winter time, what they didn't see
was they were surviving on fatty foods.
They were in complete ketosis. Then
spring came and they would they called
it in their culture starvation spring
where literally they went weeks or
months without food.
Yeah.
A lot of a lot of animals are the same
way. they they eat different kinds of
foods at different periods of the year
that what'sever available at that time.
So again, these are these shifts in
these are the kinds of shifts you're
speaking about,
right? These are all very important
points that that are now just being
realized for the first time.
But it's that adaptation from that
stress in the shift that we can
recreate. You know, I'm going to say in
laboratory and our clinics, we can
recreate these metabolic shifts, this
utilizing the body's innate intelligence
through adaptation.
Yeah. to shift the hormones, you know,
to create this metabolic thing. And I I
have to read this quote from you. This
was out of your book and I love it. He
says, "If all cancers arise from
metabolic dysfunction, then replacement
of damaged mitochondria with normal
mitochondria should prevent cancer." In
other words, mitochondria producing
sufficient respiration, meaning energy,
should suppress tumor growth regardless
of the numbers uh and types of
mutations. And and that was from your
book. And what you talk about, I love
it. You utilize the term basically, you
know, mitochondrial
um oh gosh, I forget the term reg
mitochondrial enhancement therapy.
Yes. Mitochondrial me, mitochondrial
enhancement therapy. These shifts that
we're talking about utilizing diet,
utilizing fasts, varying the diet, you
know, putting people in and out of these
restricted times. This is what you're
talking about with me, correct?
Yes. And that's the way to prevent
cancer. I mean, if cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease and you
protect your mitochondria from damage,
you don't get cancer. So, so a lot of
these preventive what you talked about,
you're not going to get cancer as long
as that the mitochondria your cells are
healthy. All right? So, even if you
inherit a gene like a brack one mutation
or a p-53 leaf many those genes damage
the mitochondria. So there are there are
ways there are ways to enhance
mitochondrial function to reduce the the
risk of having cancer from even if you
inherit a gene. So this idea of going
out and getting pro prophylactic
mastctomies or ovarctomies or this kind
of stuff is is just is a naive way to uh
to to deal with this issue. If you if
you know that if you protect your
mitochondria uh from damage uh with
these metabolic therapies, the
probability the risk of developing these
diseases is significantly reduced.
What what do you think if you just did
maybe two fasts a year, right? Just two
fasts a year, right? What what do you
think it would reduce your risk of
cancer?
Well, I I mean this would only be
speculative because we don't have any
data to support that. But I think you
have to look at those guys in the
calorie restriction society of America
and I've spoken to those folks. They're
they're in ketosis all the time
essentially. So they're always on a
restricted diet.
The um uh McLaclin, I think Paul
McGlaughlin and his wife, they're in
this group. So I asked them, "How many
people in your organization have
cancer?" And they said almost nobody.
They couldn't find they remembered one
guy from 1980 that got cancer. But the
cancer is extremely rare. and the calor
and those guys who practice calorie
restriction. So it it's it's supportive
evidence to say that if you were to do
fasts once or twice or three times a
year, the risk of cancer would be
probably reduced. And um and we see that
that's why when they want to manage type
two diabetes with ketogenic diets to
reduce glucose and and weight and risk,
the risk of cancer is in all likelihood
will go down. It's just that we haven't
we don't have enough data yet to support
that. You know, you know, you brought up
diabetes and diabetes rolls into thyroid
and all the weight loss resistance, you
know, and I I have really found those
conditions impossible to completely
resolve without these types of therapies
that we're talking about. You know,
people think, well, I'm diabetic. I
can't fast. Oh, no. Quite the contrary.
Yeah.
You know, it's necessary. It's hard.
It's hard. You have to realize it is not
easy.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. And that's why again,
folks, those listening, you know, we we
have doctors we're training uh
practitioners. training around the
country in coaching people in these
types of therapies, you know. So, I I
want to emphasize that as well, and I
think you made that point, too, is you
know, people really need supervision.
People need some support, people who
know what they're doing with this,
right? you know, it's it's important to
note that, but um yeah, I mean, you
know, I I think that when we put these
things together, you know, ketosis,
fasting, you know, intermittent daily
fasting, you know, we really have
something, you know, that is needed
today to fix this metabolic problem that
is leading to not just cancer, but
leading to diabetes, thyroid, why people
can't lose weight. This is an answer. I
want to be clear about one thing. You
know, we're talking about caloric
restriction and all studies show that
really the only way to really live
longer healthy, to extend your life,
life extension if you will, uh, is to
eat less, right? Cloric restriction. But
I don't want people to think that we're
talking about just saying, "Okay, I'm
going to eat half of my meal and put it
away." Because that in America, that's
what caloric restriction is. You and I
aren't talking about that. We're talking
about, you know, at the end of the day,
you know, I don't eat nearly as many
calories as most people, not because I'm
pushing food away, just because I'm very
efficient my cells at utilizing fat and
I'm simply not as hungry. And I've
watched, you know, my clients and others
get very proficient at fat burning at
the cellular level and they simply just
don't need as many food as much food.
They eat less. So when we're putting
people in, you know, these force times
like a fast, you know, eventually the
mitochondria gets more efficient. You
develop better mitochondria. And guess
what folks, you automatically eat less.
Would you agree with that?
Yeah, I agree. I agree with that. And
and I also feel that, you know, moderate
exercise is also an important
contribution uh together with this uh
with what you just mentioned.
Absolutely. Um but moderate I I like to
say the word moderate because uh if you
exercise it like marathon running or
this extreme
you know that damages the immune system
and creates inflammatory conditions that
can actually provoke the onset of cancer
in some people not all people believe
we like short high intensity we like
short high intensity
yeah I don't think you have to do this
prolonged damage to your body
uh in any in any sense I think moderate
ex also depends on your age and your
phys physiological state you know some
people put themselves they're being like
tortured from all this exercise.
You know, moderate exercise is important
component for enhancing mitochondrial
function under the right kind of diet
condition. So, you put all that together
and the probability of having chronic
disease is significantly reduced,
you know, but unfortunately in our
society, we we we don't it's hard. It's
hard.
Hey, Meredith, he said something really
cool there. He said, putting it all
together, right? I I teach something I I
call a multi- therapeutic approach,
right? Where we put all this together,
right? I I have this my five Rs of how
we fix a cell and you know we do this
cellular detox and removing these things
that create the damage in the first
place of the mitochondria and then we
utilize these ancient healing strategies
these fasting and putting people in and
out of ketosis
you know this we put all together and
the right form of moderate exercise that
you're talking about right
put it all together and we call that a
multi- therapeutic approach and I'll
tell you you know professor we have you
know more and more practitioners around
the country that I've been teaching this
multi- therapeutic approach to and um
you know this is the future. This is the
and your work really and I I said this
off air here that your work really just
you know proof texts exactly what we've
been doing for so long and and we are so
appreciative of the work and the studies
you have done. I I just I I can't be
more appreciative of your work. I I
really Is there anywhere that people can
go and and donate to your work? I mean,
and where do you want to lead people
more about your work? I mean, here's the
book. You can buy it on Amazon. Um, but
where else would you like us to lead
people?
Well, I mean, um, uh, we have, um, a
cancer fund here at at at Boston College
that the money's the there's I have, um,
um, a website. I think the there's a
Facebook page for my book, Cancer as a
Metabolic Disease, and and there is a
site there for people who want to make
contributions. And I can guarantee you
the 100% of the money that we get uh
goes right into the research. It doesn't
go anywhere else.
Yeah.
And um and uh and as I said, a lot of
the work that we do
research in the right area. Research in
the right area. It's not to go into the
genomic research, folks.
Yeah. Yeah. I I think it it's used to to
enhance the the concepts of the book and
eventually to come with a a reasonable
therapy for managing cancer without
toxicity that can give people
empowerment and and have them be
participatory in their own health care
and and have them our goal is to have
people finish the cancer therapy
healthier than when they started the
cancer therapy. Not not not looking like
uh you know they've been they've been
half starved and and beat up by the
system. So this can only this can happen
more as people become more uh
understanding of what of what the nature
of the disease is and our and we're work
believe me there's I I don't have a cure
for cancer. What what I have is a
strategy for long-term non-toxic
management of the disease. There's
there's a big difference here.
Yes.
You know we don't know I tell people we
don't know if you're cured from cancer
unless you die in old age from something
other than cancer. Then only then would
you know you were cured from cancer.
Yeah. you know, so uh uh other than
that, you know, uh we try to manage the
disease and and and we try to keep
people in a very high state of health
and we know we need both diet, metabolic
therapy and certain drugs that work
synergistically with the diet that can
really play a very powerful role in
managing the disease. So, uh people do
donate to our research and it's very
appreciative for anything every penny uh
no contribution is too small or too
large.
So, where do they go?
Um, well, it's on my it's on the book
the uh cancer is a metabolic disease
Facebook page.
Yeah, let me put that up there.
There's a there's a Facebook page
associated with that. It tells people
how they can donate.
Okay, great.
And just uh get a picture of that. There
it is. Cancer as a metabolic disease.
And there's your name, Thomas N. Safe.
Yeah.
So, um you know, love your work, doc.
And uh I'll tell you it's really uh it's
really an answer to a growing epidemic
even beyond cancer. I I want to say you
know this is why so many people don't
feel well. It is a mitochondrial
problem. It is a cellular energy
problem. And again our number three is
restoring cellular energy. And uh you
know we just appreciate you. We'd love
to have you on in the future you know
and and promote again you know more uh
of these uh these concepts. So, thank
you so much for being on the call,
Meredith. Uh, anything else in
finishing?
Oh, well, just like to thank you as
well. This has been such an
information-p packed interview. I'm
definitely going to have to rewatch this
episode myself, and I'm sure many
viewers will as well. Um, just so much
incredible information. We would love to
have you back in the future, too. I'm
sure we're going to generate a lot of
questions from this show.
With that said, Marith, I do want to say
this. Uh, there's articles written on
diet variation. There's shows here um at
Cella Healing TV about diet variation,
ketosis, different types of fasting. We
have shows and articles on all that. If
you're new to watching it, we have all
that information because we may have
lost you in some of those conversations.
So, watch the past shows. Thanks, Doc.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, everyone. And we'll see you
next time. Tune in next week, episode
95. We're gonna have Dr. Stephanie Senna
from MIT and we're going to be
discussing GMOs. So, thanks for watching
everyone. We'll see you next time.
[Music]